GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: upheaval on campus. The
University of Missouri
chancellor
and president step down amid
increasing student and faculty
protests over racism and
representation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Monday: Russia is caught in a
state-sponsored doping scandal,
putting Russian athletes in
danger of being banned from the
2016 Olympics.
GWEN IFILL: And life on the road
with Gloria Steinem. The famed
activists talks about fighting
for feminism in a new memoir.
GLORIA STEINEM, Author, "My Life
on the Road": It was only after
I had been living this
on-the-road
life for quite a long time,
until I was 50, that I realized,
wait a minute, this isn't
just something on the way to
something else. This is it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Students and
faculty members celebrated today
at the main campus of the
University of Missouri, after
the head of the university
system quit.
President Tim Wolfe was accused
of ignoring racial incidents.
The situation reached a
boiling point when black
football players announced a
boycott Saturday night. Later,
the chancellor overseeing the
main campus also resigned. We
will investigate this story
in detail after
the news summary.
GWEN IFILL: A judge in Louisiana
set bail at $1 million apiece
today for two police
officers accused of murdering an
autistic boy. Six-year-old
Jeremy Mardis was killed
and his father was wounded when
the officers fired on the
family's vehicle 18 times. A
lawyer for the father says
police video shows he had his
hands up when the shooting
started.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Jordan, two
Americans, a South African and
two Jordanians were gunned
down today by a police captain
in Amman. It happened at a
regional police training center.
In addition to the dead, seven
people were wounded, including
two more Americans. The
gunman was shot and killed by
soldiers. U.S. officials said
the Americans were security
contractors training
Palestinian police.
In Washington, President Obama
promised an investigation.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: We take this very
seriously and we will be
working closely with the
Jordanians to determine exactly
what happened. But, at this
stage,
I want to just let everyone to
know that this is something we
are paying close attention
to, and at the point where the
families have been notified,
obviously, our deepest
condolences
will be going out to them.
GWEN IFILL: The president spoke
during an Oval Office meeting
with Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu. The
relationship has been strained
since the Iran nuclear deal that
Israel opposed.
Today, Netanyahu insisted he's
still committed to Middle East
peace.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, Israeli
Prime Minister: We have not
given up our hope for peace. We
will never give up our hope for
peace. I don't think that anyone
should doubt Israel's
determination
to defend itself against terror
and destruction, but neither
should anyone doubt Israel's
willingness
to make peace with any of its
neighbors that genuinely want to
achieve peace with it.
GWEN IFILL: Still, the White
House said it no longer expects
peace can be achieved before
Mr. Obama leaves office
in January 2017.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Israel also
joined those saying a bomb
destroyed that Russian airliner
over
the Sinai Peninsula. The Israeli
defense minister said -- quote
-- "There is a high probability
it was a bombing."
Meanwhile, evacuation flights
resumed for Russian tourists
stranded in Sinai. About
23,000 have flown home since
Saturday. Cargo planes are
transporting their luggage
separately.
GWEN IFILL: Greenhouse gas
levels hit an all-time high last
year. The U.N. Weather Agency's
report today comes amid -- comes
ahead of a world summit on
climate change. The report
says carbon dioxide levels are
now more than 140 percent higher
than before the Industrial
Revolution. The amount of
methane is up 250 percent since
that same period. And the report
forecasts another
increase next year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, a federal bankruptcy
judge OKed a reorganization plan
for the Roman Catholic
Archdiocese of Milwaukee. It
stems from damage claims over
sexual abuse
by priests. The plan calls for
paying a total of $21 million to
nearly 460 victims.
GWEN IFILL: Wall Street had a
blue Monday over worries about
the global economy. The
Dow Jones industrial average
lost nearly 180 points to close
at 17730. The Nasdaq fell
nearly 52 points. And the
S&P 500 was down 20.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And SeaWorld says
that it will phase out its
killer whale shows in San Diego
by 2017. Instead, the theme park
will focus on the animals'
natural setting and behavior.
The announcement follows growing
criticism of the treatment of
killer whales in captivity.
SeaWorld has seen attendance
plummet as a result. The
company's decision doesn't apply
to its other theme parks that
include killer whale shows.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the University of Missouri
president ousted over his
handling
of racial issues; Russia's
involvement in widespread
steroid use; addressing Mexico's
diabetes epidemic,
and much more.
GWEN IFILL: It's been an
eventful day in Columbia,
Missouri, where the university
has been the
center of national attention
over racial tensions on campus.
At the heart of the protest was
a hunger strike that resonated
across the campus and across
the state.
TIM WOLFE, President, University
of Missouri: I am resigning as
president of the University
of Missouri system.
GWEN IFILL: The announcement
from Tim Wolfe came right after
the university system's
governing
body opened a special meeting.
TIM WOLFE: This is not, I
repeat, not the way change
should come about. Change comes
from listening, learning, caring
and conversation. Unfortunately,
this has not happened, and
that is why I stand before you
today. And I take full
responsibility for this
frustration,
and I take full responsibility
for the inaction that has
occurred.
GWEN IFILL: Wolfe's resignation
followed months of complaints
over racial slurs on the
overwhelmingly
white campus at Columbia,
including a swastika drawn on a
dormitory wall with human feces.
The student government president
was one of the targets.
PAYTON HEAD, President, Missouri
Students Association: What
happens here is that they
have the opportunity to create
an environment that is
inclusive, that you can put in
place
a zero tolerance policy for acts
of bias and discrimination on
this campus.
GWEN IFILL: As protests grew,
Wolfe's car was blocked during a
homecoming parade, black
graduate student Jonathan Butler
began a hunger strike,
protesting the slurs and the
overall
racial climate at the
state university.
The tipping point arrived this
weekend, when at least 30 black
football players announced
they would boycott team
activities until Wolfe was
removed.
Head coach Gary Pinkel endorsed
the protest, posting a photo of
the team locking arms,
saying, "We are united." By
today, faculty members were
pledging to join in.
The season of academic
discontent is not limited to
Missouri. At Yale, students and
administrators
have also been thrust into
campus upheaval, as a memo over
appropriate Halloween costumes
triggered longstanding tensions
about race and free speech.
In Columbia, Tim Wolfe's
resignation exposed raw nerves
about the lack of diversity
among
students and faculty, while also
showcasing the muscle of the
school's athletic department.
As students celebrated, Jonathan
Butler declared his hunger
strike over.
JONATHAN BUTLER, Student,
University of Missouri: It
should not have taken this much.
And it
is disgusting and vile that we
find ourselves in the place that
we do.
GWEN IFILL: Also, the football
players announced they are
returning to practice tomorrow.
Earlier this evening, before the
chancellor also resigned, I
spoke to Brenda Smith-Lezama,
the vice president of the
student body at the university
of Missouri, and Scott Brooks,
an associate professor
of sociology.
Brenda Smith-Lezama, you have
been in the middle of this and
you know what the conversations
have been. How much relief is
there tonight or how much
concern is there still in the
wake of this protest?
BRENDA SMITH-LEZAMA, Vice
President, Missouri Students
Association: Well, the relief is
unsurmountable.
But, at the same time, it's just
a first step. And that's the one
thing that I think all
students involved in this
movement want to reiterate. This
is not the endgame. So, we
need to think about how we're
going to move forward and
proceed with the administration,
as well as involving students.
GWEN IFILL: Professor Brooks, is
this a new issue that we're
hearing so much about now
or is it an old one that's
been given new life?
SCOTT BROOKS, Associate
Professor, University of
Missouri: No, it's definitely an
old one
that has been given new life.
You can go back to 1969 with the
Legion of Black Collegians and
them giving a list of
demands of their concerns at
that time. And so whether we're
talking about 1969 here at
the University of Missouri or
whether we're talking about
other campuses, I think that
it's a fairly common story for
black students, even black
faculty staff, that they are
operating
on -- at a university and they
have this kind of mixed feeling.
You know, it's a place where
they're coming to get the best
that they can from the
university.
They are looking and hoping and
expecting that this is the time
of their lives, and
yet they are stuck -- struck
with a harsh reality, that
they're not treated often as
equal citizens, as equal
students, and that's across the
levels, faculty, staff and
students.
So this is not a new story.
GWEN IFILL: Brenda Smith-Lezama,
tell me how a little bit what --
how this blew up, how
this became such a big issue,
and whether this has been your
personal experience, the
stories that we're now hearing
coming out of campus about the
experiences of black students
not only now, but
for some time now.
BRENDA SMITH-LEZAMA:
Well, of course.
Well, I think that, for most
students, there has been a shift
post-Ferguson and going back
to that year, year-and-a-half
period, the activism on campus
has been at an all-time
high. I think that, for the
first time, movements were being
led in a very systematic and
very
intentional manner.
So, coming from the student
body, I think that there is a
lot of change that we all
see that needs to be made, and
this is the first time that we
have all been able to rally
around one cause, and that
is making them do better.
GWEN IFILL: So, this is a
post-Ferguson effect, as it
were?
BRENDA SMITH-LEZAMA:
Absolutely. Absolutely.
I think that, at least for me, I
will say that, prior to Ferguson
and all the events
that followed, there was
obviously racial issues and
there was a lot of issues of
systematic
oppression with itself. However,
after Ferguson was -- one, we
were met with a lot of silence
from our administration. And I
think what is most frustrating,
is that when students
were crying out for help, our
administration left us stranded.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let me ask you
this. And then I want to ask
Professor Brooks as well.
What difference will it make
that president Wolfe is gone, if
this is a question and a
problem that's predated even
his arrival on campus in 2012?
BRENDA SMITH-LEZAMA: Removing
Tim Wolfe is by no means going
to solve the system that
has built for so many years here
at the University of Missouri.
However, I think that
specifically after Ferguson, Tim
Wolfe did serve as kind of the
icon of
the system that has failed us.
And one of the biggest things
that students have brought
up with concern is the fact that
we need to have educators in
those positions, people
who are willing to make that
change, people who are willing
to listen to students, rather
than meet us with silence and
not validate our concerns and
our struggles.
GWEN IFILL: Professor Brooks,
what about that? What difference
will it make if the president
of the university is now gone?
SCOTT BROOKS: Well, I think that
Brenda has articulated it very
well.
This is simply a step in the
right direction. The difference
is not about removing Tim Wolfe.
The difference is going to be
seen in what happens next. And
that's really what we're
encouraged to pay attention to.
You know, what we're excited
about is, how can we move
forward, now that we know that
there is at least one less
person that we feel has been an
obstacle? This is the way
that students feel. And this is
also a way that faculty, staff
are coming together. We're
coming together under the guise
of, you know, what are -- what
changes can we make now that
we have at least an opportunity
for shared government?
GWEN IFILL: You know, I want to
go to what happens next, but
allow me for -- going back
for a moment, would this have
reached the head it did,
starting with you, Professor
Brooks, if there had not been
the involvement of the student
athletes, of the football team?
Was that the tipping point?
SCOTT BROOKS: Right.
Well, I think that you have to
look at the student athlete and
their student side. So,
if the student athlete could not
connect with this larger student
movement, the student
athlete wouldn't
necessarily come forward.
I agree that there is no doubt
the importance of sport is --
you know, we know how important
sport has become, particularly
at the university. We call
athletics the front porch of the
university,
talk about the collegiate arms
race, the sports industrial
complex. There was $1 million
that
the university could occur in
terms of fines if the student
athlete didn't perform, if
the football players did
not go out onto the field.
And so there is no doubt that
that is an important
consideration for each and every
university
that has a big football -- a
big-time football team. So,
that's not simply a Missouri
issue.
That's a national issue. And
student athletes have had this
power and they have been trying
to exercise this in different
ways for the last couple of
years, as we have seen student
athletes organizing around
amateurship vs. being able to
gain some stipends.
So this is a growing national
piece as well. The revolt of the
athlete has never gone too
far beneath the surface. It did
take a moment like this and the
courage of our concerned
students to step forward to help
to galvanize and give student
athletes even a voice and
a platform and strength
to move forward.
GWEN IFILL: And, Brenda
Smith-Lezama, so you have had
today's victory. You admit --
you
concede that it's a partial
victory. So what does happen
next?
BRENDA SMITH-LEZAMA: Well,
honestly, I'm a student. I am
not an administrator. I am not
the one who is paid and tasked
with coming up with these
answers.
And that's the one thing that
has been so frustrating over the
past year-and-a-half,
is that administrators have
often held back and asked us to
come up with the solutions.
I can't go to school full-time,
work and then on top of that do
an administrator's job as
well. And that's
what's so crucial.
But I will say is that this, if
nothing else, really put our
administrators on high alert
to know that University of
Missouri students will not stand
idly by and let our university
fall to pieces.
GWEN IFILL: Brenda Smith-Lezama,
vice president of the student
body at University of Missouri,
and Professor Scott Brooks,
thank you both very much.
SCOTT BROOKS: Thank you.
BRENDA SMITH-LEZAMA:
Thank you for having us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now allegations
that Russian athletes have been
gaming international sports
for years.
A report out today from an
independent commission of the
World Anti-Doping Agency found
-- quote
-- "a deeply rooted culture of
cheating in Russia's track and
field programs, including
systemic doping, bribery and
destruction of evidence, much of
it done at the Russian
government's
behest."
The commission's report
recommended lifetime bans for
five Russian runners, including
the
gold and bronze medal winners
at the 2012 London Olympics.
Commission head Richard Pound
said the doping had to be
state-sponsored.
RICHARD POUND, Chairman, World
Anti-Doping Agency: Our
conclusion was that all of this
could not have happened or
continued to happen without the
knowledge of and either actual
or implied consent of the state
authorities. They were not
operating the sport, but, as
I say, they would certainly have
known, and could not not have
known about this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's take a
deeper look into the
investigation and its impact
with a sports
reporter who has long
covered the Olympics.
Christine Brennan of USA Today
is also a commentator for ABC
News, and she joins me now.
Welcome back to the
program, Christine.
So, this is an extraordinary
report, isn't it?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN, USA
Today: Well, it is.
It's groundbreaking and it's
earth-shattering in many ways,
although, for those who have
been watching what's happened
with FIFA, the soccer governing
body, and all the concerns
there -- and people may go back
and remember the East Germans
and the cheating in swimming
and track and field all the way
back to the '60s and into '70s,
that in some ways this
may not shock people at all.
But here we are talking about
one of the great forces in
Olympic sports, Russia, of
course,
just hosted the last Olympic
Games, the Winter Olympics,
which Vladimir Putin paid $51
billion
to put on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: And now to
have this story hit, in many
ways no surprise, and yet
obviously
eye-opening and very alarming.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And when you
start to read this report,
Christine, you see, it's not
only the athletes, it's the
coaches, it's the doctors, it's
the people who regulate
the sport, and, as we said,
going all the way up to the
government.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Exactly.
The government is implicated.
And, you know, I don't know that
we will ever get to the bottom
of exactly how high up this
goes in Russia, but I think we
can dream big. And when you
think of how important the Sochi
Olympics were to Putin and to
Russia and the kind of money
that they spent in that country
at this time with so many
issues, you just have to wonder
if it goes all the way to the
to.
And, as I said, we will never
know. And, journalistically, we
have no idea right now. But what
the World
Anti-Doping Agency is alleging
here is extraordinary. And if it
starts to work people up and
sponsors
up to what's really going on in
some of these countries, then I
think it turns out to be
a good thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it possible to
put on a finger on how many --
who won and who didn't
win, who medaled and who didn't
as a result of this cheating?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Oh, in some
ways. You alluded to the fact
that the gold and the bronze
medal
in the women's 800 meters
would be taken away.
I think fans over the years have
come to realize, for example,
with Lance Armstrong, when they
stripped away his titles, seven
Tour de France titles, that
there was only one person in
the three times seven, 21 of the
top three in each seven years,
who would have been clean.
And so going back to the Olympic
record books in the '70s, where
we know the East Germans
and the Soviets were cheating,
and then you still look at their
records and you still
look at their names as
medalists, so, in some way,
that's almost a futile effort
because
it's so much bigger than that.
But it certainly is sad for
those athletes who haven't
cheated to be denied those
medals.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, we should
point out the Russian
government, Russian officials
are
saying that this is politically
motivated. They are denying it.
Among other things, they're
saying that how can you accuse
them of doing this when the
international agency was in
charge of doing the testing?
They're saying, if we were doing
this, then why didn't
somebody see it at the time?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Well, and
it's a good point, except for
this, that the Russian officials
run those labs.
So the lab was in Sochi. And, of
course, this does bring into
question what was going on
at the Sochi Olympics. Right
now, we're talking track and
field athletes. And, obviously,
that is a huge sport for the
Summer Games, and whether these
athletes and whether Russia
should even be allowed to have
track and field athletes in Rio
next summer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: But you go
back to Sochi, which of course
was this hub of international
sports based on the Winter
Olympics, and those officials
there are running that lab.
Also keep in mind that Russian
security officials were
involved, and there are the
implications
and allegations that they were
actually strong-arming some of
these people to make these
decisions
or to in some cases destroy
up to 1,400 drug tests.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Christine, just
quickly, another argument that
is heard today is that, well,
this is going on in a lot of
places, it's not just the
Russians. How much validity is
there?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Oh, I think
it's true. And I think, when we
look at baseball, look
at all of our sports in the
United States, to think that the
bad chemists, Judy, are
still way ahead of
the good chemists.
So, drug testing is important,
but they can't catch all the
designer drugs that are being
made that they haven't yet found
a test for. So I think the
important thing for fans and
people who love sports, buyer,
beware. As a consumer, you know
that that product could
be tainted, whether it's Major
League Baseball, the NFL, any
sport in the United States
potentially,
but also at the Olympic level.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
just quickly, effect on the
Olympics going forward?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Yes. I think
it has a big effect, because
when you look at the tainted
nature of this and the fact that
if people can't trust what
they're watching, if you
can't trust a foot race between
eight men or eight women, what
in the world can you
trust and how does that impact
sponsors moving forward?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Christine
Brennan, it's quite a story.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN:
Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Take care.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": an
overwhelming victory for
Myanmar's opposition party;
Politics
Monday, scrutiny and late-night
humor; and how Gloria Steinem's
life on the road shaped
her into a feminist icon.
But, first, combating a growing
diabetes epidemic in Mexico.
Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro reports. It's part of
his series Agents for Change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The North
American Free Trade Agreement
brought Mexico chain
restaurants,
malls and big box stores with
abundant shelves, and an
epidemic of diabetes.
JAVIER LOZANO, Clinicas del
Azucar: Regular food, but sugar
free.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Javier
Lozano, whose mother suffers
from the disease, thinks he can
make
a difference. Three years ago,
he opened a chain called
Clinicas del Azucar, or the
Sugar
Clinics.
JAVIER LOZANO: Our dream was,
imagine there's a clinic in
every corner. Just as we have
franchise for hamburgers and
pizza and fried chicken.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The clinics
are a one-stop shop to see a
doctor or nutritionist, get
your eyes checked, or feet, then
pick up a pair of shoes or
snacks.
Lozano, a 33-year-old MIT
graduate, hopes to have 200
outlets by 2020, but it's a tiny
fraction of the demand in a
country that by then could have
20 million diabetics.
DR. SIMON BARQUERA, National
Health Institute: Basically,
diabetes prevalence has been
doubling
every six to 10 years.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Dr. Simon
Barquera of Mexico's National
Health Institute says it
now affects 14 percent of
Mexican adults, a population
with widespread genetic
predisposition
to diabetes.
Adding to the risk, 72 percent
are obese or overweight. Those
numbers are now higher than
Mexico's northern neighbors, but
with double the impact. Far
fewer Mexicans have their
symptoms under control.
DR. SIMON BARQUERA: For example,
in Canada and the U.S., more
than half of the population
with diabetes has adequate
control, in Mexico, only 25
percent.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Complicating
matters, half of those affected
aren't aware they have
diabetes. And those who are
diagnosed can remain
asymptomatic for years, and they
do
little to control its advance.
DR. SIMON BARQUERA: They go
looking for private care and
they see that it's too
expensive.
Then, usually, they go back to
the public care, and it's
limited. So, you know, when
people have a difficult
decision, we usually just defer
the decision.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Maria De La
Luz Mireles (ph) says she
struggled for years with
scattered,
substandard care until
specialists at the Sugar Clinic
helped bring her symptoms under
control.
MARIA DE LA LUZ MIRELES, Mexico
(through translator): I went to
many clinics and never got to
see
a specialist. It was general
doctors and they'd change my
medications. This went on for 20
years.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That overall
lack of access to care means
more advanced cases: limb
amputations,
heart, kidney and eye disease,
more people like Luis Martinez,
at 64, long retired and
nearly incapacitated.
LUIS MARTINEZ, Diabetes Patient
(through translator): My kidneys
have been very seriously
affected,
so I have to have dialysis twice
a day, and four months ago, I
lost the last bit of sight
that I had.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: As a young
man, Martinez moved from the
country to the city, part of
a massive urbanization. Three
out of four people now inhabit
cities in this once agrarian
nation, says Sugar Clinics
endocrinologist Eduardo Camacho.
DR. EDUARDO CAMACHO, Clinicas
del Azucar (through translator):
Most people lived in the
countryside,
and so they used a lot of energy
and got a lot of exercise in
order to feed themselves.
It was labor-intensive work.
Now, with urbanization, people
are using much less energy in
their
daily lives to get the
food that that they need.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Then there's
the food, plentiful, affordable,
but processed. Dr.
Barquera says it's an
industrialized version of the
healthy, traditional Mexican
diet.
EDUARDO CAMACHO: What we have
now, tacos, both the tortillas,
bigger. They have a lot
of meat. They have a lot of fat.
Sometimes, the quesadillas are
deep-fried.
MAN (through translator): People
are on the go, working, so if
you have got money, you
go to a restaurant. If you
don't, you eat tacos on the
street. And people drink soda,
rather than have water.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Maria
Sanchez Perez, who is losing her
sight and lives in fear of a
stroke, blames her
addiction to Coca-Cola.
MARIA SANCHEZ PEREZ, Diabetes
Sufferer (through translator):
Those big bottles that you see,
those wouldn't even
last me a day.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She's hardly
alone. According to Coca-Cola,
Mexicans are far and away the
biggest consumers of the
company's products, especially
the flagship Coca-Cola, which is
sold in three-liter bottles in
this country. On average, the
company says Mexicans consume
43 gallons of Coke products per
year. That works out to about 55
of these per person
per year.
In 2014, after a campaign by
citizen activist groups, Mexico
became the first nation to
enact a so-called soda tax, 10
percent on sugar-sweetened
drinks, 8 percent on salty
snacks. In its first year, one
study showed consumption dropped
by 6 percent. But the
study's methods were questioned
by the food and beverage
industry, led by multinationals
including U.S.- based
Coke and Pepsi.
The industry has fought such tax
proposals, successfully in most
cases, including New
York and San Francisco.
LORENA CERDAN, Mexican Consumer
Products Industry Board: It's a
regressive...
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It's a
regressive tax, is what you're
saying.
LORENA CERDAN: It's a
regressive tax, yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Lorena
Cerdan is a spokesperson for
Mexico's food and beverage trade
group,
which argues its products
are unfairly singled out.
There's absolutely no link
between soda consumption at 43
gallons per person per year and
the
disease burden of this country?
LORENA CERDAN (through
translator): There is no causal
relationship to link directly
sugary drinks with diabetes.
There is a causal relationship
between a sedentary lifestyle
and an overconsumption
of calories.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She says the
urbanized lifestyle and overall
increase in calories
from many sources
are the problem.
The industry has contributed to
public awareness and fitness
campaigns. But its critics, like
consumer advocate Alejandro
Calvillo, are skeptical.
ALEJANDRO CALVILLO, Consumer
Advocate: They are, by this way,
trying to create confusion,
that you don't have good
products or bad products.
Everything is on the relation of
the calorie
intake that you consume and
the calories that you spend.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He says
there's also been lackluster
enforcement of recent
regulations,
banning salty snacks and sodas
in schools, for example.
CAVUTO: All right. This is the
schools in the country that we
have reports that are
not following the regulation. We
are making a list of the
schools.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And experts
say it's not just at school, but
at home that a culture
shift is needed; 26-year-old
Karla Almanza gets good grades
from her nutritionist at
the Sugar Clinics for
controlling her weight and sugar
levels. But she says its not
been
easy cutting out foods and
sugary drinks she loves and
imposing a diet on her mother,
who
is also diabetic, and two
daughters and her husband, who
are not.
KARLA ALMANZA, Diabetes Sufferer
(through translator): For the
children, I have always
cooked like that. They're used
to it. It's really difficult for
my husband. He says:
"I'm not a rabbit. Give
me some more meat."
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It's also
hard on the budget, she says.
The healthy diet, ironically,
is costlier than fast food.
Helping her budget, her clinic
fees are fixed, payable up front
for the full year, though
financing is offered to help
patients afford care.
Lozano says this ensures
patients come back regularly,
their complications not only
treated,
but also tracked.
JAVIER LOZANO: We have been on
the -- more than three years in
care and we have seen
more than 15,000 patients.
So we have a lot of data.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The data
helps determine what works and
what doesn't, which also in
turn helps lower costs and
increase access to care in an
epidemic that most experts says
this nation is unprepared for.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam Lazaro in Monterrey,
Mexico.
GWEN IFILL: Fred's reporting is
a partnership with the
Under-Told Stories Project at
Saint
Mary's University of Minnesota.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn now to
Asian nation of Myanmar, the
country formerly known as
Burma, where Sunday's election
is on track to produce a
landslide victory to the party
of former political
prisoner Aung San Suu Kyi.
We start with a report from John
Irvine of Independent Television
News.
JOHN IRVINE: It seems the world
has a new democracy. After years
of brutal repression,
Burma's freedom movement and its
charismatic leader, Aung San Suu
Kyi, have prevailed,
and that was something to
celebrate here tonight.
MAN: She is genius. She is
genius. She is a great leader.
She is very honest. She is
like father. She is our mother.
JOHN IRVINE: But the day began
differently, with Yangon
strangely subdued. Many heeded
official advice to stay at home.
The joy of yesterday's vote had
been replaced by uncertainty
about what might happen next.
Then, when election officials
didn't show up to announce
results at the appointed time,
there was concern that democracy
delayed might be democracy
denied again.
Soon, Ms. Suu Kyi appeared at
her party headquarters. She
urged supporters to keep calm
and to remain
peaceful. Then, nine hours late,
the first results did come in,
and people were calm
no more.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN IRVINE: Not long ago, just
being a member of this political
party was a jailable offense.
Aung San Suu Kyi served a total
of 15 years in custody. Now the
former prisoner is poised
to become (INAUDIBLE)
In the five years since Ms. Suu
Kyi's release, many new faces
have turned up here, businessmen
and tourists for whom part of
the appeal of this place is its
timeless quality. The flip
side is that many Burmese
live in a time forgot.
Slums like this are commonplace.
Home is a tiny stilted shack
teetering over swampland.
These are the people Aung San
Suu Kyi has promised to help.
Ms. Suu Kyi's next burden
is expectation. But after
decades of struggle, she has put
herself in a position to
deliver.
Democracy has won through here,
a thrilling prospect for people
impatient for a future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we take a
closer look at Myanmar's
historic election with Tom
Malinowski.
He's the assistant secretary of
state for democracy, human
rights and labor.
Welcome to the program.
TOM MALINOWSKI, U.S. Assistant
Secretary of State for
Democracy, Human Rights and
Labor:
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, is the
opposition win clear? Is there
any doubt that they on the track
to victory?
TOM MALINOWSKI: Well, we don't
have the official results yet.
And it's important to remember
that, under the system in Burma,
the military is reserved
to 25 percent of the seats in
Parliament, which means her
party, the NLD, would have
to win two-thirds of the
contested seats in order to get
a majority and to form a
government.
So we don't know if they
have done that yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does it appear --
some of the early reporting
indicates that it looks like
that's where they're headed.
TOM MALINOWSKI: Well, I don't
want to make predictions as to
numbers.
I think what -- it is important
to step back, though, and to
remember that this was a day
25 years in coming. A lot of
people in Burma sacrificed and
many died to get to this day.
And the United States, for all
of that period of time,
supported the hope, the dream
that
one day the Burmese people would
be able to make the choice that
they did today.
And there are still enormous
problems. Burma is not yet a
full-fledged democracy, but I
think this does show us that
where we are principled and
patient and persistent in
pursuit
of that goal, we can
make a difference.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, if Ms. Suu
Kyi's party does obtain the
two-thirds that you just
described,
is it -- are you confident, is
the United States confident that
the military rulers
are going to let her and her
party essentially take over?
TOM MALINOWSKI: Well, we take
absolutely nothing for granted.
This has been a tough struggle
in Burma for many
years, as I mentioned.
But the military has promised,
including the commander in chief
just in the last few days,
that they will respect the
results. And I think, having
gone this far, I think it will
be quite hard for them
to turn back now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are the
chief challenges going forward,
whoever is victorious in the
Parliament?
TOM MALINOWSKI: Well,
there are several.
First, the country is still
operating under a non-democratic
constitution, which gives
the military, as I mentioned, a
quarter of the seats in
Parliament, which gives them,
actually, a veto power over
changes in the constitution, the
right to appoint the interior
ministers.
The police in Burma still
answers to the military and not
to the civilian government. The
constitution,
Aung San Suu Kyi and her party
have said, will need to change.
And that's something
that we have -- we, the United
States, have called for us as
well.
And then there's perhaps the
deepest and most difficult
problem, and that is that, well,
one of the flaws of this
election was that hundreds of
thousands of people, the
Rohingya
Muslims...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
TOM MALINOWSKI: ... who had
previously been able to vote in
Burma, had lived there for
generations, were
disenfranchised, were denied the
vote, because of a really
virulent, racist
campaign that was staged we
think in part to try to deny the
opposition a victory in
this election.
But that racism, that
intolerance that was created for
the purpose of this election is
still out there. And those
people are still suffering a
great deal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, just
quickly, we know there was some
criticism of Ms. Suu Kyi and
some of the things that she and
her party did during this
campaign. That seems to be
being overlooked right now
in this early celebrating.
TOM MALINOWSKI: Well, it looks
to me like, when people were in
the privacy of the voting
booth, after all of these years
of waiting for this day, they
saw a choice between the
past and the future, and despite
everything that has happened and
everything that has
been said, it looks like most
Burmese are focused on moving
forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, in the next
few days, Secretary Malinowski,
what does the United States look
for? What are you looking
for to come out of Burma?
TOM MALINOWSKI: Well, first, we
want to wait and see what the
election observers say about
the conduct of the elections. We
will know that, I think,
tomorrow.
We supported a program in which
thousands of observers fanned
out across the country
to make sure that these
elections were properly run.
Then there will be a long period
of political
transition.
So, depending on the results, we
will want to see that the
military, as you suggested,
will respect them, will allow a
civilian government to be
formed, and ultimately that
those civilians
will have control, and that the
military will gradually step
back and play a more appropriate
role for a democratic country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Assistance
Secretary Tom Malinowski, thank
you.
TOM MALINOWSKI: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: We may still be a
whole year out from the
presidential election here, but
to
hear one candidate tell it, the
scrutiny has never been higher.
And while one GOP front-runner
took issue with the media, the
other took center stage
on the comedy circuit.
And that's where we begin
this Politics Monday.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: So, why are you
hosting Saturday Night Live?
Why? And the answer is, I have
really nothing better to do.
GWEN IFILL: Donald Trump is by
no means the first politician to
use late-night comedy
to make his or her case. They're
everywhere this year, day and
night, dancing with Ellen,
sparring with Stephen,
yukking it up with Jimmy.
JIMMY FALLON, Host, "The Tonight
Show With Jimmy Fallon":
Congratulations. You're speaking
to Donald Trump.
GWEN IFILL: Washington Post
reporter Elahe Izadi says the
ability to showcase a sense
of humor has become a campaign
essential, as important as
delivering a policy speech.
ELAHE IZADI, The Washington
Post: This is now part of just
being on the campaign trail.
This isn't just something that
is an extra. This is part of
what it means to be a national
political candidate, for better
or for worse, is to have the
willingness to go on these
shows and allow yourself to be
made fun of and also just appear
very, very silly.
GWEN IFILL: The tradition
stretches back decades. John F.
Kennedy showed up on Jack Paar's
"Tonight
Show" in 1960. In 1968, two
months before Richard Nixon was
elected president, he memorably
appeared on "Rowan &
Martin's Laugh-In."
RICHARD NIXON, Presidential
Candidate: Sock it to me?
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: And, in 1992, Bill
Clinton slipped on dark glasses
and a saxophone for a visit
to Arsenio Hall's
late-night show.
But President Obama became the
first sitting president to take
to the couch when he visited
Jay Leno's "Tonight Show" in
2009. Such appearances almost
always stir objection, some of
it about
questioning the candidate's
dignity, much of it from other
candidates seeking equal
time.
Immigration activists took it up
a notch at Rockefeller Center
this weekend, offering
a reward for anyone who would
disrupt Trump's "SNL"
appearance. In the end, they
settled
for protesting offstage,
outside the studio.
And we turn now, as always, to
Amy Walter of The Cook Political
Report and Tamara Keith
of NPR.
GWEN IFILL: So, as we look at
this, laughing, some of it
funny, some of it not so much,
who's winning these
comedy wars, Amy?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Well, I think that you
set it up quite well in the
piece, which is, the point is to
make these people who spend most
of their time in very
contrived situations look
natural and normal, like this is
just your best friend talking
to you.
And each of them has a different
reason to go do these shows. If
you're one of the candidates
that doesn't get a whole lot of
attention, here is a chance to
get in front of a new
audience that might not have
paid any attention to you.
But for Donald Trump and Hillary
Clinton, two of the best known
candidates, if you look
at the polling, they have one
thing in common. And that is
voters think they're not likable
or easy-going. So what better
way to do it than go on one of
these shows?
GWEN IFILL: Is it working?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: It's free media. That's
for sure.
And Hillary Clinton's campaign
after she went on "SNL," the
next day or a couple of days
later, there was an event, and
at the event they were blasting
that skit up onto the screen
in a loop. They liked it. At one
point, she told somebody in the
audience, well, you can
call me Val.
There is this idea in campaigns
that voters are likely to vote
for the person who they
would like to have a beer with.
Well, one way to look like you
would be someone fun
to have a beer with is to show
up on late-night TV as a
bartender or...
GWEN IFILL: I have never
understood how that works with
the presidency. But that's a
different
conversation.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: I want to talk now
about scrutiny, because we have
had a couple of major
candidates,
Ben Carson and Marco Rubio, who
came under heightened scrutiny
because of things they
have said, things they
have done in their past.
And I wonder whether it feels
different or this is the way it
always is? Before you answer
that question, let's listen to
what Ben Carson had to say about
this whole issue.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
BEN CARSON (R), Presidential
Candidate: There's no question
I'm getting special scrutiny,
because there are lot of people
who are very threatened, and
then they have seen the recent
head-to-head polling against
Hillary and how well I do. And
they are worried.
And the whole point
is to distract.
GWEN IFILL: And he insists he's
being scrutinized like no one
ever has.
AMY WALTER: No one has ever been
under this level of scrutiny --
I don't know. I have
spent a little time watching
other campaigns. This is very
typical.
That's the thing about this
election. There's stuff about
this election that we have never
seen before and doesn't make a
whole lot of sense. But, as I
have been talking about
throughout
this year, at some point, the
laws of the road, the political
rules of the road start
to apply.
And one of those is, the higher
up you go in the process, the
longer you're the front-runner,
the more scrutiny you're going
to get. There is absolutely
nothing new about this. And
the problem for Ben Carson is,
his autobiography is his
campaign.
So, of course that's the place
where the scrutiny is going to
be the most significant. It also
doesn't help him that he doesn't
have any real specific policy
objectives. So, if he
wants to talk about policy,
that's great. Then he has got to
get more specific about
those policies.
GWEN IFILL: Marco Rubio knew
what was coming, which is that
people were going to use --
raise
questions about his handling of
party-issued credit cards in
Florida when he was speaker
of the Florida House. And he
came prepared with an answer.
TAMARA KEITH: Marco Rubio is
running a very professional
campaign.
Here's a candidate who did some
oppo research on himself, did
the opposition research, knew
what was coming, and had an
answer, and, in fact, made this
credit card thing sort of
part of his overall narrative,
which is, I wasn't a rich guy, I
was living paycheck to
paycheck, just like
everybody else.
He really just blended it in
with the story of Marco Rubio.
And I think that he played
it well. And in some ways, he's
inoculating themselves. This
comes out now. He isn't even
a front-runner at this
point. It comes out now.
GWEN IFILL: It will just
seem like old news.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
TAMARA KEITH: And it will seem
like old news. And, in fact, it
sort of is old news, because
it came out in his
2010 Senate race.
GWEN IFILL: And it should be
said, both of them have been on
e-mail raising money.
AMY WALTER: Raising
money off of this.
TAMARA KEITH: Oh, yes.
AMY WALTER: And it's always...
GWEN IFILL: The
media is after me.
AMY WALTER: And, as you said,
there is something about the
scrutiny, that it happens every
single election. So is the
attack on the media: Give me
money because the media is
unfairly
maligning me.
TAMARA KEITH: And Ben Carson
said that, in just last week,
while the media was going
after him, he raised $3.5
million from 10,000 people.
GWEN IFILL: Throw me in the
briar patch, right? It's like,
oh, this is so terrible what
you're
doing to me.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: The perils
of front-runner-itis.
Let's talk about the Democrats
for a while, because one of the
interesting things we're
seeing happening with Hillary
Clinton and Bernie Sanders in
particular is daylight is
happening -- is opening between
these two candidates, who
promised -- at least he had
promised that he wasn't really
interested in attacking Hillary
Clinton.
AMY WALTER: I still don't think
he's interested in attacking
Hillary Clinton.
GWEN IFILL: Really?
AMY WALTER: No, I mean, when you
see him go on the offense, it's
still very light. And
it's still very much about,
listen, I'm just going to put
myself out here. I leave it for
you to judge whether or not
Hillary Clinton's been as
consistent.
And, look, to Hillary Clinton's
credit, she keeps moving further
and further on to Bernie
Sanders' terrain and moving
further and further to the left.
He's not giving her easy
openings.
What he has to make is the
argument that she's not been
consistent in her support, as
opposed
to she doesn't support
certain issues.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes. He seems to
be making the argument that: I
was right all along. I was
right first.
He doesn't say her name. And he
doesn't actually see this as an
attack. He sees this as fair
game, drawing a contrast.
GWEN IFILL: Comparison, yes.
TAMARA KEITH: Comparison. He
thinks that's completely fair.
I think that his campaign would
like him to push harder, but
he's just not quite as
comfortable
with it. And Hillary Clinton has
really no need to overtly go on
the attack against Bernie
Sanders.
GWEN IFILL: Only a
few seconds left.
We have got another debate, yet
another debate tomorrow night.
What are you watching for?
AMY WALTER: Let's see about the
Ben Carson scrutiny and where we
go with that. He's certainly
going to be much -- it's
much more of a focus.
GWEN IFILL: And Donald Trump has
certainly been going out of his
way to remind everybody
of what all the questions are.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes. And all eyes
on Marco Rubio. Will he have
another strong performance in
this debate?
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Well, we will be watching, or
something. I will let you watch
and tell me all about it.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: The next
time we see you, yes.
GWEN IFILL: Amy Walter, Tamara
Keith, thank you very much.
TAMARA KEITH: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: She is a writer,
editor, but, above all, a
feminist activist.
Gloria Steinem has been in the
forefront of the women's
movement in this country for
more
than half-a-century. Now at 81,
she has penned her memoir, "My
Life on the Road," our newest
addition to the
"NewsHour" bookshelf.
She talked to Jeffrey Brown
recently at the historic
Sewall-Belmont House and Museum
of
the women's suffrage and equal
rights movement here in
Washington.
JEFFREY BROWN: You write here
early on about your father, who
taught you something through
his -- quote -- "ability to live
with and even love insecurity."
That's an interesting trait.
GLORIA STEINEM, Author, "My Life
on the Road": Well, it certainly
was necessary for a freelance
writer like me, but I didn't
know that at the time.
I just thought that that's the
way life was. And he always
said, "If I don't know what's
going to happen tomorrow,
it could be wonderful."
JEFFREY BROWN: And that became
your life in a sense, or
something you could live by?
GLORIA STEINEM: Well, not quite,
because, of course, you want to
be like the other kids,
you know?
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
GLORIA STEINEM: So, I looked at
the movies and I saw how kids
went to school and fathers
had jobs.
And -- but my parents were kind
and loving and wonderful people,
so I was lucky in that
way. And I, of course, didn't
know yet that the idea of living
with insecurity would be
really helpful in later life,
both as a writer and a person in
movements.
JEFFREY BROWN: You write a book
about life on the road. When you
look back now, does
it look like it was a life that
you chose? Or did it just
happen, unfold?
GLORIA STEINEM: You know,
that's a deep question.
JEFFREY BROWN: Good.
(LAUGHTER)
GLORIA STEINEM: I think both,
because what we grow up with
feels like home. So, in that
sense, it was destined.
But I also spent all the middle
years of my life assuming that I
would have to settle
down and live like everybody
else. And it was only after I
had been living this on-the-road
life for quite a long time, I
mean, until I was 50, that I
realized, wait a minute,
this isn't just something on the
way to something else. This is
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is it.
GLORIA STEINEM: Yes, right.
JEFFREY BROWN: This
is who you are.
GLORIA STEINEM: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sure.
GLORIA STEINEM: And that --
well, I think, in a real way,
because my father had no home,
I mean, he was a total wanderer,
and my mother had no journey of
her own, because she had
to give up the career as a
writer and a journalist, and,
you know, she kind of gave up
everything
she loved.
So, it took me while to realize
that it isn't either/or. It's
and.
JEFFREY BROWN: What about today?
Do you see the same commitment,
the same focus in young
women?
GLORIA STEINEM: Oh, yes,
more, way, way, way more.
We were like 12 crazy ladies in
the beginning. You know, we were
definitely the core of
something,
but not the something. And now
all of these issues are majority
issues. And young women
are way more likely to just
assume that they are going to be
likely to use all of their
human talents.
In fact, they get radicalized as
they get older, because they get
into the labor force,
and they discover that maybe
equal pay is not happening.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, the idea that
we're in a post-feminist
society?
GLORIA STEINEM: Oh,
that's ridiculous.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ridiculous.
GLORIA STEINEM: Ridiculous. You
know who's saying that? I can
guarantee you they're the
same people who were saying to
me in the beginning, you can't
do this. It's against God,
Freud,
somebody.
(LAUGHTER)
GLORIA STEINEM: And now the new
form of obstructionism is to
say, well, it's over, you know,
just
to keep you from
doing anything more.
It's so just begun.
JEFFREY BROWN: The book tells
about many successes along the
way. I'm wondering about what
you
think of as the
greatest failures.
GLORIA STEINEM: The confidence
to tell the truth about our
lives.
JEFFREY BROWN: Meaning?
GLORIA STEINEM: Well, for
instance, one in three American
women has needed at some time
in her life an abortion. And
there's still enough shame to
it, or, you know, controversy
at least, so that it's difficult
for people to say that.
JEFFREY BROWN: When you look at
things like abortion rights,
outlawing discrimination
in the workplace, a lot of
successes along the way, but,
even now, on the defensive in
some areas, right, as these
battles unfold in statehouses.
They continue to unfold.
GLORIA STEINEM: Well, yes.
Essentially, the people who are
against reproductive freedom
kind of lost what they wanted in
Washington,
so now they are striving to
gain it in state legislatures.
JEFFREY BROWN: But opponents of
these things -- and this has
been the case for all your
life, I'm sure -- come to these
issues with the same certainty
that you do, the same sense
of being right as you.
GLORIA STEINEM: Well, but here's
the difference. We are
protecting their rights.
We are protecting --
reproductive freedom protects
the right to have children. They
are not protecting our right to
decide when and whether to have
children.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask you,
finally, are you able to imagine
yourself as a young woman
in today's society? You're with
young women all the time. You're
still talking to them.
GLORIA STEINEM: Yes.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: What advice
do you give to them?
GLORIA STEINEM: Here's my
advice: Do not listen to me.
(LAUGHTER)
GLORIA STEINEM: Really.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do not?
GLORIA STEINEM: No.
I want to support their
listening to themselves. Each of
them has things that they love,
things
that they do that they love so
much, they forget what time it
is, which is a good measure,
when they're doing it.
They know their own life and
situations. I'm here to support
that and say, OK you're --
you're
not -- OK, you're not more
important than somebody else,
but you're not less important
either.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
"My Life on the Road."
Gloria Steinem,
thank you so much.
GLORIA STEINEM: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: You don't find a lot
of people who will say, "Do not
listen to me," after
all this time on
the public stage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You sure don't.
Boy, she's been fighting those
battles all this time, but still
-- still seems to have
the energy to keep fighting.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, Hari Sreenivasan
catches up with a man walking
around the world.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.